



WG Working Group                                               M. Mathis
Internet-Draft                                                      MLab
Intended status: Experimental                               3 March 2023
Expires: 4 September 2023


                        Safe Congestion Control
                    draft-mathis-tsvwg-safecc-latest

Abstract

   We present criteria for evaluating Congestion Control Algorithms for
   behaviors that have the potential to cause harm to Internet
   applications or users.

   Although our primary focus is the safety of transport layer
   congestion control, many of these criteria should be applied to all
   protocol layers: entire stacks, libraries and applications
   themselves.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-mathis-tsvwg-safecc/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the TSVWG Working Group
   mailing list (mailto:tsvwg@ietf.org), which is archived at
   https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/tsvwg/.  Subscribe at
   https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/tsvwg/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/mattmathis/safeCC/.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 4 September 2023.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2023 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Preamble
   2.  Introduction
   3.  Conventions and Definitions
   4.  Tentative list of criteria
     4.1.  Free from congestion collapse
     4.2.  Free from regenerative congestion
     4.3.  Bound steady state losses
     4.4.  Bound slowstart duration and loss
     4.5.  Bound losses on link changes
     4.6.  No unnecessary slowstarts
     4.7.  Freedom from starvation
     4.8.  Bound standing queue
     4.9.  Maintain queue headroom
     4.10. Bound control frequency
     4.11. Monotonic response
     4.12. Balanced probe size
     4.13. Self scaling
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  Normative References
   Appendix A.  Estimating min RTT
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Preamble

   This document is written in extra terse congestion control jargon,
   approximately one sentence per paragraph.

   Editorial comments to authors are enclosed in [square brackets].
   Outstanding action items may be tagged with @@@@@.

   [Remove this section before publication]

2.  Introduction

   We present criteria for evaluating Congestion Control Algorithms for
   behaviors that have the potential to cause harm to Internet
   applications or users.

   Ideally we would cast these criteria as requirements; however such an
   effort is doomed to fail because many of them have technical
   exceptions that are unavoidable in ways that are not important.  For
   an example of this issue see Section 4.1

   As an interim position: all implementations SHOULD comply with all
   criteria, and MUST document all exceptions and evaluate the risks
   associated with the exceptions.  Under what circumstances and how
   severely they fail to comply what is the extent of the harm that they
   might cause?

   To prove the criteria described in this note they should be used to
   evaluate current and legacy algorithms: we expect to find alignment
   between known implementation pathologies and failed criteria.
   Discrepancies may suggest additional criteria or sharpen our
   understanding of how to decide if a failed criteria is material or
   not.

   Indeed, Reno[Reno] and Cubic[Cubic] are known to fail the criteria
   presented here, and as a consequence exhibit pathologies including
   bufferbloat[bufferbloat] and poor scaling[Scaling].

3.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   *Exhaustion*  a network overloaded to the extent that the average
      delivery rate is below one segment per flow per RTT.

   *Material*  failing a criteria in a manner that is likely to cause
      pathological behaviors under some conditions.

   *Non-Material*  technically failing some criteria, but unimportant,
      insignificant or otherwise unlikely to cause pathological
      behaviors.

   *Under adverse conditions*  refers to any changes in behavior when
      subject to any increase in any congestion signals (loss, delay,
      marks or reduced queue space or capacity) from any initial state.
      For example introducing 1 Mb/s cross traffic to an otherwise ideal
      10 Gb/s link is an adverse condition that SHOULD NOT trigger any
      of the misbehavior's indicated below.

4.  Tentative list of criteria

4.1.  Free from congestion collapse

   Adverse conditions do not cause increasing overhead, specifically do
   not cause duplicate data at the receiver.

   Test: for a fixed work load, the overhead must be constant,
   independent of the network congestions across the entire operating
   range of the application or network

   If there is packet loss, the retransmits must exactly match the
   packet losses

   Example of an application that can cause congestion collapse: a
   download engine that responds to transient network errors or
   persistent congestion by restarting downloads from the beginning.

4.2.  Free from regenerative congestion

   Adverse conditions do not cause additional presented load.

4.3.  Bound steady state losses

   Steady state bulk transport should not cause more than 2% loss over
   any unchanging network.

   Any transport with some form of selective acknowledgements can easily
   run at a much higher loss rate.  The real problem is the harm caused
   to all single packet transactions, including DNS and connection
   establishment for nearly all protocols and services.  Single packet
   transactions generally can only use an RTO timer for recovery,
   typically without any preceding RTT measurement, thus they often take
   several orders of magnitude more time than any selective
   acknowledgment based recovery.

   The question at hand is really how much harm do we want to permit
   transport to inflict on all other protocols (and not transport vs
   transport).

   For example, are we ok with happy eyeballs getting the wrong answer
   2% of the time, because the IPv6 connection establishment failed on
   the first message?

   BTW I consider 2% to be a bit high: 1% or 0.1% would be better,
   however Reno and Cubic can both easily cause much more loss.

   We need some studies to decide the appropriate value for the final
   document.

4.4.  Bound slowstart duration and loss

   Slowstart into a droptail queue should not cause more than one RTT of
   loss nor cause more than 50% loss for that RTT.  e.g.  Provisional
   window/rate reductions should start when losses/disorder is first
   detected, even before the loss recovery can decide if the missing
   segments are due to reordering or loss.

4.5.  Bound losses on link changes

   Step changes in link properties (RTT, bandwidth or queue size) or
   cross traffic should not cause losses that are larger than the change
   in maximum flight size supported by the link.  Specifically, during
   loss recovery the transport is not permitted to send more data than
   reported at the receiver.  (Conservative property from PRR.)

4.6.  No unnecessary slowstarts

   All application stacks must use connection caching, CC state caching
   or some other mechanism such that application workloads are prevented
   from causing persistent or repeated overlapping slowstarts.

4.7.  Freedom from starvation

   (need a new strong definition).  Flows below some resource threshold
   (data rate, window size, ConEx marks, etc) will successfully search
   upwards, as long as there is either idle capacity or other flows
   above the same(?) threshold.

4.8.  Bound standing queue

   Do not create steady state standing queues larger than
   k*minRTT*maxBW, for some prescribed k, to be defined.

4.9.  Maintain queue headroom

   Individual flows do not keep queues pegged at full even if the queues
   are substantially smaller than minRTT*maxBW.  When there is queue
   full, CC should reduce its window enough to create some small
   headroom to prevent locking out new flows

4.10.  Bound control frequency

   Control frequency scales with 1/rtt but is insensitive to data rate.

4.11.  Monotonic response

   The CCA should have monotonic response to all congestion signals that
   it responds to (loss, marks, delay, etc) otherwise it will have
   multiple stable operating points for the same network conditions.  It
   would be likely to exhibit stable pathologies such as latecomer
   (dis)advantage.

4.12.  Balanced probe size

   Balance the worst case queue backlog against the need to trigger mode
   shifting in links that batch data.  This should become a global
   (policy) parameter of the Internet, because the queue backlogs force
   jitter on flows trying to do realtime without QoS.

4.13.  Self scaling

   at all layers.  If the network is too slow, the application must also
   slow down to avoid "stacking" requests.

5.  Security Considerations

   TODO Security

   This document provides evaluation criteria for Congestion control and
   other implementation or algorithms that might be deployed on the
   internet.  It has no direct security considerations of its own.

   Over the long haul it is expected to increase the overall robustness
   of the Internet by helping to eliminate pathological congestion
   behaviors that have the potential cause the Internet to be fragile
   under some conditions.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

7.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

Appendix A.  Estimating min RTT

   This is known to be hard@@@

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Author's Address

   Matt Mathis
   Freelance, Measurement Lab
   Email: mattmathis@measurementlab.net
   URI:   https://mattmathis.net/
